---
title: Using Deno's First-class Wasm Support
author: masahiro-kondo
date: 2024-12-29T00:00:00.000Z
tags:
  - Deno
  - WASM
image: true
translate: true

---

## Introduction
In the November release of Deno 2.1, first-class Wasm support was added.

[Deno 2.1: Wasm Imports and other enhancements](https://deno.com/blog/v2.1)

Previously in Deno, it was possible to load and execute Wasm using Web standard APIs, but from version 2.1 onwards, it can be used with `import` just like regular modules.

## Loading and Executing Wasm: The Traditional Method
Below is an example of instantiating a WebAssembly called `add.wasm` placed locally and using the exposed function (`add`).

```typescript:main.ts
const wasmInstance = await WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(
  fetch(new URL("./add.wasm", import.meta.url)));

const { add } = wasmInstance.instance.exports as { add: (a: number, b: number) => number };

console.log(add(1, 2));
```

(This is also to prevent TypeScript type errors, but) it's quite a lengthy code. First, it instantiates with the WebAssembly API, then retrieves the exported function (in this case `add`) from the instance to make it usable.

Execution uses the `--allow-read` permission[^1].
```
$ deno --allow-read main.ts
3
```

[^1]: Since Deno 1.46, the final release of the 1.x series, the `deno run` subcommand can be omitted.

:::column:How to Create `add.wasm`
The above `add.wasm` is converted from the following `wat` file.

```lisp:add.wat
(module
  (func (export "add") (param i32 i32) (result i32)
    local.get 0
    local.get 1
    i32.add))
```

By installing WABT (WebAssembly Binary Toolkit) and using the `wat2wasm` command, you can convert this `wat` file to wasm format.

@[og](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wabt)

By using the `wat2wasm` demo site, you can download the converted wasm file without introducing WABT locally.

@[wat2wasm demo](https://webassembly.github.io/wabt/demo/wat2wasm/)
:::

:::info
For the Web standard API on loading and executing Wasm, please refer to the following document.

[Loading and running WebAssembly code - WebAssembly | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/ja/docs/WebAssembly/Loading_and_running)

Usage of Wasm using Web standard APIs in Deno is also introduced in the following (though it's quite an old article).

[Getting Started with Deno - Part 5 (Using WebAssembly)](https://developer.mamezou-tech.com/deno/getting-started/05-using-wasm/)
:::

## Loading and Executing Wasm: Import

From Deno 2.1 onwards, Wasm can be loaded and executed using `import`.

```typescript:main.ts
import { add } from "./add.wasm";

console.log(add(1, 2));
```

It has become very simple. Execution is also simple.

```shell
deno main.ts
```

:::info
Deno performs type checking even on Wasm modules.
:::

## Trying It from a Web Worker

In [a previous article](https://developer.mamezou-tech.com/deno/getting-started/05-using-wasm/), I introduced an example of executing Wasm code in a distributed fashion using Web Workers. At that time, the method was to pre-compile the Wasm in the main process, pass it to the Worker, and have the Worker instantiate and execute it[^2]. Now, since the Worker code can directly `import`, it has become easier.

[^2]: Because I wanted to avoid compiling for each worker.

The code on the Worker side. Using the `add` module, it performs addition processing based on parameters extracted from messages, and sends the result.

```typescript:worker.ts
import { add } from "./add.wasm";

self.onmessage = e => {
  const result = add(e.data.a, e.data.b); // Execute add
  postMessage(self.name + ": " + result); // Send worker name and result
};
```

The main code. It just creates multiple workers and writes the processing when messages are received from the workers.

```typescript:main.ts
const worker1 = createWorker("worker1");
const worker2 = createWorker("worker2");
handleWorkerMessage(worker1); // Register message receiving handler for worker1
handleWorkerMessage(worker2); // Register message receiving handler for worker2

worker1.postMessage({ a: 1, b: 2 }); // Send message to worker1
worker2.postMessage({ a: 3, b: 4 }); // Send message to worker2

function createWorker(name: string) {
  const worker = new Worker(new URL("./worker.ts", import.meta.url).href, { 
    type: "module",
    name: name 
  });
  return worker;
}

function handleWorkerMessage(worker: Worker) {
  worker.onmessage = e => {
    console.log(e.data);
  };
}
```

Execution result. We can obtain the processing results from each Worker using Wasm.

```shell
$ deno --allow-read main.ts
worker1: 3
worker2: 7
```

## Conclusion
That's a quick experiment with Deno's first-class Wasm support. Wasm is incorporated into Deno's module graph, and due to Deno's analysis and caching, it seems to be usable at high speed.

As expected with first-class support, there are no glue code-like parts at all. The barriers to using Wasm have significantly lowered.
